+++
canonical = "https://elogii.com/blog/delivery-experience/"
categories = ["Last Mile Delivery"]
date = 2021-12-22T11:00:00Z
description = "Want to give a GREAT delivery experience to your customers? In this post, learn what makes a good delivery great, and take actionable steps to do it."
image = "/blog/uploads/delivery-experience.jpg"
tags = ["Retail", "Pharmacy Delivery", "Order Fulfillment", "Last Mile Delivery", "Grocery Delivery", "Furniture Delivery", "Food Delivery", "Ecommerce", "Customer Experience"]
title = "What Makes a GREAT Delivery Experience? [+ How to Provide It] "
titletag = "What Makes a GREAT Delivery Experience?"
type = "post"

+++
What makes a great delivery experience, well, GREAT?

In this post, we’ll break down what people want from their delivery.

And steps you can take to measure experience and see what’s preventing you from providing a better delivery service.

Plus, advanced strategies, tips, and techniques you can use RIGHT NOW to improve it, and provide the best delivery experience to customers.

Let’s get started.

## Why Is Delivery Experience Important?

A positive delivery experience has a HUGE impact on your business on so many levels.

In fact:

Shipping boosts customer satisfaction and brand loyalty, according to [**98% of shoppers**](https://www.getconvey.com/press-d-last-mile-delivery-save-retail/).

Most of all, it affects how customers view your delivery. And whether they use it.

On the other hand:

When consumers have a bad delivery experience, **89% want to provide feedback**.

And [**70% of all customer complaints**](https://elogii.com/blog/delivery-statistics-2020/) have to do with the quality of the delivery experience.

So it’s very important.

To show you just how important it is, here’s how delivery affects your customers.

### Customer retention

Acquiring customers is necessary for a company's success, but it’s important not to overlook customer retention.

But return customers are valuable.

[**Customers are 27% more inclined to buy again**](https://www.globenewswire.com/news-release/2016/10/19/1394364/0/en/Luxury-Client-Experience-Board-Reveals-How-Successful-Sales-Teams-Turn-First-Time-Shoppers-into-Long-Term-Clients.html) after only one purchase.

If you can encourage them to come back for a second or third time, you can **increase customer spending by 54%**.

That is why you need to keep your customers satisfied and make them come back.

### Brand loyalty and advocacy

A 5-star delivery experience is important to your company's success. A satisfied customer is more likely to become a loyal one who can help you increase profits.

A loyal customer promotes your business through word-of-mouth marketing, and advocates for your brand and product/service.

It is the best marketing that you can have for your brand.

### Promoting sustained growth

Businesses that are focused on short-term growth commonly ignore the importance of loyal customers.

But it’s the only way to establish a brand image that provides sustainable growth and profits.

Providing a great delivery experience for customers is a critical component of distinction, customer loyalty and advocacy, and business growth.

### Competitiveness on the market

More profit is generated by loyal clients who spend more, along with lower acquisition expenses.

These profits can be utilized to develop brand power, explore new markets, and innovate to go ahead of the competition.

Nowadays, without an exceptional delivery service, your business is not going to stay competitive in the market.

## What Makes a Good Delivery Experience?

Speed. Trust. Consistency.

These are the things that ensure a good delivery experience and customer satisfaction.

To do so, you must meet the following requirements:

### Convenient on-time delivery

From the checkout to the doorstep, people want fast and easy delivery.

In fact, [**80% of consumers**](https://www.pwc.com/future-of-cx) cite convenience and speed as the most important part of their customer experience.

And when it comes to ordering online, people have high expectations of [**delivery speed**](https://elogii.com/blog/delivery-speed/).

So much so that Amazon has taken advantage of this with next-day and same-day delivery.

But fast delivery must remain dependable to work.

Your customers have to trust and rely on you to deliver their packages on time - every time.

If a delivery is late or delayed, or you fail to deliver an order, you risk losing customer trust and damaging your reputation.

To learn more, read our guide on [**how to prevent late deliveries from happening**](https://elogii.com/blog/how-to-prevent-late-deliveries/).

### Undamaged packages

It may seem self-evident, but buyers expect their product to arrive in the same condition as if they had picked it up in the store.

However, this isn't always the case.

And many big brands encounter the same problem.

In fact, [**11% of UPS packages**](https://www.huffpost.com/entry/one-in-10-ecommerce-packa_b_4371992) arrive with damage.

And in case a package arrives damaged, customers can request a refund or submit a negative review.

[**Custom packaging**](https://elogii.com/blog/custom-packaging/) doesn’t just look pretty. It can also protect the items inside.

Customized packages reduce the amount of loose space inside the package.

Which means the items won’t move as much during transport.

So there is less of a chance the package will get damaged.

### Transparency throughout the delivery process

Transparency throughout the process is the final component of great delivery.

Proactive transparency should begin the moment an order is placed.

And it shouldn’t end until the order is delivered.

Sending email or text notifications at each stage of delivery is a good practice.

Customers will have a better experience if they know the delivery status.

They will be able to track where their package is and when it will arrive.

If they are aware of any delays in advance, they will be less frustrated if the delivery is late.

## How to Measure Delivery Experience?

Customers are your biggest resource for increasing brand awareness.

That’s why it's critical to provide them with the best possible delivery experience and make them want to do business with you again.

Now we're going to show you how to [**measure your delivery experience**](https://elogii.com/blog/delivery-performance/) to see what you're doing right and where you can improve.

### 1. Analyze customer reviews

Regularly conducting customer satisfaction surveys provides insight into your customers' perceptions of your brand, product, or service.

[**Net Promoter Score**](https://www.netpromoter.com/know/), or NPS, is an excellent approach to gauge customer satisfaction.

Based on their interactions with your business, this metric determines how likely your customers are to recommend you to others.

Analyzing NPS at several touchpoints throughout the customer experience will show you where you need to improve the delivery experience and where you're currently offering a great experience.

You can also decide to follow up on positive or negative customer feedback to interact with customers, build your relationship with them, and improve customer retention and loyalty.

### 2. Ask customers for feedback

Always listen to your customers.

This is the cornerstone to creating a delivery experience customers want in any delivery operation, regardless of the business.

Customer feedback can also provide a lot of information about your business.

When you want to generate an offer based on genuine customer demand, feedback is crucial.

### 3. Identify reasons for returns

Understanding the complete route a customer takes is the most crucial component of providing a great delivery experience.

You may then concentrate on making each of those touchpoints a great experience for the customer.

If a consumer wishes to return a product, for example, make it simple for them to do so.

If you provide a return shipping label for your consumer during this touchpoint, you'll provide a great customer experience.

After you've focused on providing the best delivery experiences, it's time to assess your progress.

Ask your customers for feedback, and then you can easily identify reasons for returns.

### 4. Identify reasons for failed and missed deliveries

Customers who can track the location of their delivery while it is being shipped are more likely to be at home to receive it, which reduces the chances of missed deliveries.

Driver tracking data and operational KPIs are critical for identifying bottlenecks and increasing efficiency.

It's crucial to choose a solution that allows you to see success rates, on-time rates, service times, feedback scores, distance traveled, and other metrics.

This information can then be segmented further by teams, drivers, days, weeks, and even hours of the day.

That is how you will identify reasons for failed and missed deliveries.

### 5. Identify the rate of and reasons for customer churn

Churn is unavoidable in the business world.

However, it's critical to learn from churn when it occurs so that it doesn't happen again.

Make sure you're tracking your churned clients regularly so you can see if:

* your churn rate
* the reasons for churn
* what steps your team can do to avoid a repeat situation

## How to Provide the BEST Delivery Experience to Your Customers

To provide a transparent and on-time delivery every time might seem unrealistic, but all you need to make it happen are the right tools and processes.

### 1. Provide real-time delivery tracking

Real-time order tracking provides your consumers with real-time updates on your delivery process, allowing them to track their product and prepare ahead as it approaches.

Customers benefit from delivery tracking since they know exactly when their shipment will arrive, down to the minute.

They don't have to worry about missing their package or wasting time waiting for a delivery.

_Here’s a full guide on_ [**_how to track orders_**](https://elogii.com/blog/how-to-track-order/)_. (Regardless of whether you’re a customer or you’re a business looking to add it to your service offer)_

### 2. Provide proof of delivery

[**Proof of delivery**](https://elogii.com/blog/proof-of-delivery/) is a record that verifies that a package has been delivered successfully.

Proof of delivery can take two forms:

* the buyer can sign to confirm receipt
* the driver can send a photo of the box on the doorstep at the destination

Deliveries become easier for customers when proof of delivery is provided.

PODs can also be used to ensure order accuracy.

You'll have proof that the delivery was made, which can save you money on refunds or replacements.

### 3. Provide easy payment

If a preferred payment method isn't accessible, up to [**7% of shoppers abandon their cart**](https://www.shopify.com/blog/shopping-cart-abandonment).

Customers who are presented with the correct mix of payment alternatives have a higher likelihood of completing a purchase.

You should also make your checkout process easy and fast.

Try not to include any additional costs, since that is another big reason for cart abandonment.

### 4. Communicate with your customers

Customers nowadays expect to have real-time access to information regarding their orders, such as the option to track their drivers and receive expected delivery dates and times.

Customers can also see where their driver is in real-time and communicate with the driver if there is a need.

However, many businesses lack the necessary technology to facilitate these customer communications.

### 5. Provide a personalized delivery experience

This entails becoming a part of the end-to-end solution for getting products to clients without having to rely on third-party delivery services.

They want to be kept informed about the status of their order throughout the route.

They'll go to a competitor who offers a more personalized experience if you don't.

### 6. Offer free delivery options

Free or low-cost delivery is one of the most essential considerations in determining where to buy, according to [**53% of shoppers**](https://www.inboundlogistics.com/cms/article/five-reasons-why-the-delivery-economy-is-here-now/).

You may better manage your costs or integrate delivery costs into your standard product pricing and offer free delivery to your customers when you handle delivery in-house.

### 7. Offer contactless delivery options

Offering a contactless delivery option is a significant approach to gain [**customer trust**](https://elogii.com/blog/building-trust-with-customers-through-delivery/), as many people want to minimize their physical encounters with others.

Based on one survey, [**82% of people want contactless delivery**](https://www.getapp.com/resources/contactless-experiences/) to continue when the pandemic is over.

Contactless delivery can save your drivers time and speed up your [**delivery routes**](https://elogii.com/blog/how-to-plan-better-delivery-routes/), which is good for your business.

### 8. Make sure orders arrive intact and fresh

To ensure that items arrive in good condition, keep an eye out for two things: good packaging and careful handling during the delivery procedure.

Make sure to utilize cushioning material and boxes that are the proper size for your products when packaging them.

With food delivery, the most common customer complaint is that the food is not warm or fresh enough.

Instead, restaurant owners may control their delivery timeframes and deliver food at the perfect temperature every time by adopting in-house delivery.

### 9. Offer a favorable return policy

Make it as simple as possible for a customer to return a product.

Include a shipping label for return.

Then, a consumer is given a return package with a pre-printed label.

All they have to do now is drop the thing off at the post office.

That is a fantastic customer delivery experience because it made returning a product simple.

_Here’s_ [**_how e-commerce returns work_**](https://elogii.com/blog/reverse-logistics-and-ecommerce-returns/) _and how to set up reverse logistics to support them._

## Take Back Control of the Delivery Experience with eLogii

Now that you know what makes a great delivery experience, we’ll show you how to use our tools to take full control of the delivery experience.

### Plan and optimize delivery route

If you want to eliminate the most waste from your route planning, [**delivery management software**](https://elogii.com/blog/how-to-choose-delivery-management-software/) is the way to go.

Rather than planning a single route with a few stops for a single driver, the program allows you to plan as many routes as your fleet has vehicles.

And each of those routes will include as many stops as are required to complete the task.

You may plan all of your routes at once with delivery management software. It also takes seconds to complete rather than hours.

To build the most optimal routes, the software collects more data.

It can take into account a variety of factors, including road types, traffic patterns, and weather conditions, in addition to distance and drive time.

### Provide ePOD and tracking links

Customer service is regularly updated on when each delivery will arrive thanks to [**live delivery tracking**](https://elogii.com/capabilities/live-operations).

They can utilize the dashboard to check real-time delivery ETAs and [**notify customers**](https://elogii.com/capabilities/communication-alerts) if this isn't being done automatically through the system via automated email and/or SMS messages.

### Get feedback directly from customers

Our technology also allows you to learn what your clients think of your service.

Each [**consumer can rate**](https://elogii.com/capabilities/ratings-feedback) the driver's quality and the overall service provided.

This provides you with vital insight into your operations and can assist you in continuously optimizing and improving your client service.

We've got everything you'll need to get started on enhancing your delivery.

### Evaluate the delivery experience with data and analytics

Data collection is the only way to find out what your customers desire.

Consumer data can assist you in improving the average delivery experience.

It allows you to learn not only what customers think of the service, but also what they would like to see in the future.

Data collection does enable you to get a broad picture of the delivery experience.

You may then tap into it and utilize it as a roadmap for aligning your offer and operations with your customers' desires.

You can use the information to determine critical [**delivery logistics metrics**](https://elogii.com/blog/7-key-metrics-in-delivery-logistics-to-measure-for-success/) such as on-time delivery and cost per delivery.

## Over to you…

Tell us what you think.

How will you improve the delivery experience for your customers?

Which strategy would work best for your business?

And if you need more help, we’ve got you covered:

**Here are the nine free guides that will show you exactly what we do to optimize the last mile and dominate delivery logistics.**

1\. [**How much does delivery software cost**](https://elogii.com/blog/delivery-management-software-cost/) \[+Prices, Payment Plans, and MORE\]

2\. [**Use Delivery Software to WIN MORE Customers**](https://elogii.com/blog/how-to-win-over-customers-with-delivery-management-software/)

3\. [**How to Solve Failed Delivery Attempts RIGHT NOW**](https://elogii.com/blog/delivery-attempt/)

4\. Want to Raise Your Average Order Value? Read [**THIS GUIDE**](https://elogii.com/blog/average-order-value/)

5\. [**How to Manage Direct-to-Consumer Fulfillment (D2C)**](https://elogii.com/blog/direct-to-consumer-fulfillment/) \[Step-by-Step\]

6\. [**Plan Better Delivery Routes**](https://elogii.com/blog/how-to-plan-better-delivery-routes/)

7\. Your Delivery Is Late: [**How to Prevent Late Deliveries from Happening?**](https://elogii.com/blog/how-to-prevent-late-deliveries/)

8\. The writing is on the wall: [**Clear signs your delivery needs a Route Planner**](https://elogii.com/blog/why-you-need-a-route-planner/)

9\. [**How to Raise Payload Capacity of Your Delivery?**](https://elogii.com/blog/payload-capacity/)

## See how it works in action

[**_eLogii_**](https://elogii.com/) _is an end-to-end cloud-based delivery management platform. Our powerful solution solves the biggest challenges of modern distribution and field service businesses, including: route optimization, planning and execution._

[**_BOOK YOUR DEMO_**](https://elogii.com/book-demo) _in less than 2 minutes. Fill out a quick form and one of our experts will get in touch with you to show you how our solution works in action. The demo is tailored specifically to your business needs._

_Start saving time and money in your operations today!_